
                                SECTION I.Introduction

A brain-computer interface (BCI) provides direct communication between the brain and a computer.
BCIs measure people’s brain activity and translate this activity into control commands for external devices.
Steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs), P300 waveforms, and motor imagery are three typical brain patterns commonly used in electroencephalography (EEG)-based BCIs.
For instance, P300 speller systems can identify the character that the user wants to input by detecting the P300 component evoked by flashes of the corresponding button in a virtual keyboard [1], [2].

The use of a typical EEG-based BCI system usually requires a calibration phase, during which a training dataset is obtained while the user performs a specific task [3].
Based on the calibration data, a subject-specific model is trained, and it is subsequently used for online prediction.
However, it is generally time consuming and inconvenient to collect training data from each user to allow them to operate the BCI system.
Furthermore, it is unproductive with respect to BCI applications (e.g., text entry, wheelchair control).
Therefore, the calibration period must be minimized, which is especially important for patients with limited ability to concentrate [4].

Many attempts have been made to shorten or eliminate the user’s calibration phase and to develop subject-independent models that can work across sessions, subjects, and even EEG amplifiers.
For example, Li et al.
proposed several iterative semi-supervised methods for building classification models, including support vector machine (SVM) models, with small training datasets [5], [6].
Several online unsupervised methods were used to set up zero-training BCIs, including motor imagery BCIs [7] and P300 BCIs [4], [8].
However, in general, a period of adaptation was needed, during which the BCIs were gradually improved in terms of performance.
Transfer learning, which aims to improve the learning of a predictive function in a target domain based on the knowledge in a source domain for a learning task [9], is a promising method for addressing such a problem.
For instance, Lu et al.
proposed an adaptive linear discriminant analysis (LDA) method for addressing the problem of considerable variations in EEGs across subjects, and the test data without labels from the new subjects were used to update the classification model [10].
Domain adaptation techniques based on weighted adaptation regularization [11], logistic regression [12], LDA methods [13], [14], and Riemannian geometry methods [15]–​[18] were widely used in BCIs and in other EEG analysis tasks such as emotion classification.
Multitask learning framework-based methods were proposed to address subject-to-subject and session-to-session transfer problems in motor imagery-based BCIs, and the classifiers of multiple subjects were learned jointly such that the classification error of the new subjects was minimized [19], [20].
Yuan et al.
presented a canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method that transferred SSVEP templates from the existing subjects to a new subject to enhance the detection of SSVEPs [21].
In [22], a subject-transfer framework based on multiple distance measurements among different subjects and model ranking and fusion was proposed to obviate inter- and intrasubject variability and to enhance the results of drowsiness detection with EEG.
However, to the best of our knowledge, the development of a subject-independent BCI with satisfactory performance remains an open problem, mainly because EEG brain patterns are highly subject specific, dynamic and weak, with low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).
Furthermore, most previous work on subject-independent BCIs did not consider large training datasets.
When only limited EEG data are available for a specific BCI task, traditional machine learning methods have difficulty in learning reasonable feature representations.
Additionally, cross-amplifier EEG data analysis, which is urgently needed for multicenter data collection, big EEG database establishment and BCI applications, has not been studied in the literature to date.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are usually composed of multiple layers for extracting multilevel hierarchies of features [23] and for combining feature extraction with regression or classification.
Encouraged by the excellent results deep learning has achieved in various machine learning tasks, researchers have attempted to introduce deep learning algorithms into the field of brain signal analysis and achieved promising results thus far.
For instance, a convolutional neural network (CNN) and a recurrent convolutional neural network (RCNN) achieved very accurate results for P300-based speller systems [24], [25].
EEGNet, which is a specially designed CNN architecture for EEG analysis, performed well in P300, error-related negativity (ERN), movement-related cortical potential (MRCP), and sensory motor rhythm (SMR) tasks [26].
Readers can refer to references such as [27], [28] for a comprehensive review of deep learning for EEG data analysis and BCIs.
While mainly focusing on DNN models for within-subject EEG classification tasks, researchers incorporated DNNs into a transfer learning framework to combine representational learning and knowledge transfer and thereby boost the EEG classification performance when small training datasets or no training data were available.
Fahimi et al.
proposed an end-to-end deep CNN to exploit intersubject information for mental attentional information decoding [29].
In [25], a CNN was used for establishing a cross-subject P300 BCI, where a small amount of labeled data from test subjects was still required so that the model could be fine-tuned to achieve satisfactory results.
In [30], an end-to-end CNN model was used to improve the performance of a motor imagery BCI, and a transfer learning approach was proposed to adapt the global classifier to single individuals to improve the accuracy.
In [31], a transfer learning method named online pre-alignment strategy (OPS) combined with two deep learning models was proposed to enhance the cross-subject and cross-dataset performances in the motor imagery paradigm without any additional calibration data, which is a good attempt to build a subject-independent motor imagery BCI.
Although a few studies have shown that deep learning approaches could be used to transfer knowledge from the EEG data of a number of subjects to other subjects, such studies are still in their infancy.
For three typical BCI paradigms, i.e., P300, SSVEP and motor imagery-based BCIs, few subject-independent DNN models that can work across sessions, subjects, and different EEG amplifiers have been reported, possibly because big EEG data were not available and hence the value of big EEG data was not explored.

In this study, an invariant pattern learning method based on a CNN and big EEG data is proposed for use in a subject-independent P300 BCI speller system.
We built an EEG dataset of 200 subjects.
Each subject performed a P300-based spelling task while data were recorded using two types of amplifiers.
The subjects were divided into two groups: a group with 150 subjects building the training and validation sets and a group with the other 50 subjects for an independent test.
After the CNN was trained, the preprocessed EEG data acquired from the test subjects, consisting of data corresponding to each character, were input into the CNN, whose output was regarded as the probability of the presence of the P300 component.
The character with the maximum probability was identified as the character that the user intended to input.
The experimental results demonstrated that almost all subjects obtained significant cross-subject and cross-amplifier effects using our method.
The average accuracy was more than 80% after 10 rounds of button flashes in the offline analysis, and the average accuracy was 75.34% after an average of 6.04 rounds of button flashes in the simulated online test.
Furthermore, more than 50% of subjects achieved accuracies of more than 85% in the offline analysis; the average accuracy was higher than 94%, and the average accuracy was 85.93% after an average of 5.37 rounds of button flashes in the simulated online test.
These results showed that, with the help of a big training dataset, the cross-subject and cross-amplifier CNN classification models could be established for subject-independent P300 BCIs that do not require subject-specific calibration for a large percentage of users, which will substantially improve P300 BCI applications.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the methods, including those for data acquisition, data preprocessing, the CNN for P300 detection, decision making, and the simulated online test.
The experimental results are presented in Section III, and a discussion is provided in Section IV.
Finally, the conclusions in Section V review the approach outlined in this paper.

