
                                SECTION IV.Discussion

In this study, we proposed a CNN and big EEG data-based learning method for a subject-independent P300 BCI speller system, attempting to realize a P300 speller without requiring subject-specific calibration.
The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for learning invariant patterns across subjects and across amplifiers.

The good performance of the learning method is attributed to the excellent ability of the deep neural network for data fitting and the large size of our dataset, which includes data from a relatively large number of subjects compared with existing work.
These two factors provided the model with the possibility of extracting subject-independent features.
A question may arise regarding whether larger training sets will always result in better performance.
We explored the influence of the size of the training set on the cross-subject and cross-amplifier classification accuracy and found that when the size of the training set was relatively small, containing data from a relatively small number of subjects, the accuracy increased as the number of subjects in the training set increased.
After the number of subjects reached a certain level, increasing the number of subjects had little effect on the accuracy.
For more detailed results, readers can refer to Appendix C.
However, enlarging the dataset to a higher order of magnitude (e.g., involving data of 2,000 subjects) may be good practice to explore the impact of big data on the results.

Our results showed that the standard deviations of the accuracies over all subjects were large, reaching above 10% and even above 20% in some cases.
This result indicates that the performance of cross-subject classification varied greatly by subject.
This inference is also confirmed in our research on the distributions of accuracies for different subjects, which is presented in Appendix B.
In fact, a percentage of subjects had very high performances.
Averaging the ratios over the six training and test set situations, we found that 66.00% of the subjects for the independent test set achieved accuracies above 80%.
Among them, 56.66% of the 50 subjects achieved accuracies above 85%.
However, some subjects achieved poor accuracies.
Specifically, 4.33% of the 50 subjects in the independent test set achieved accuracies below 50%.
The event-related potential (ERP) waveforms (without downsampling) from the Cz and Oz channels are presented in Fig.
5 and Fig.
6 for five subjects who had excellent and five subjects who had bad performances, respectively.
For each stimulus type (target or nontarget), the ERP waveforms of each subject were extracted by taking the time-locked average of the EEGs across 60 trials and 10 flash rounds per trial.
Note that the nontarget waveforms, which inherently have no dominating P300 patterns, appear to be flat lines due to the averaging operation.
The waveforms of the subjects with good performances, which are shown in Fig.
5, contain obvious features of typical ERP components, such as N200 and P300.
In contrast, as shown in Fig.
6, the subjects with bad performances did not exhibit typical features in their brain patterns.
For example, for channel Oz of the two amplifiers, the waveforms of Subjects 6–10 did not contain typical P300 components.
Furthermore, for some subjects, the ERP components had relatively large offsets in terms of time (e.g., Subjects 6, 7, and 10 in Fig.
6).
It is worth mentioning that some subjects who had poor performances in our cross-subject analyses may achieve high accuracies after a subject-specific calibration process since their waveforms for target and nontarget stimuli may still be distinguishable.
For instance, for each of the above five subjects with poor performance, we performed 5-fold cross-validation using his/her data, and a subject-specific SVM model was trained in each fold.
These five subjects achieved fold-averaged accuracies of 95.00%, 100.00%, 82.50%, 95.00% and 100.00%.


Fig.
5.
ERP waveforms for five subjects (denoted as Subjects 1–5 here) with good performances in cross-subject learning.
Each row corresponds to the waveforms of one subject, and the left and right sides correspond to the amplifier SynAmps2 and the amplifier NuAmps, respectively.
On the left/right side, the first and second columns are signals collected from the Cz and Oz channels, respectively.

Show All


Fig.
6.
ERP waveforms for five subjects (denoted as Subjects 6–10 here) with bad performances in cross-subject learning.
Each row corresponds to the waveforms of one subject, and the left and right sides correspond to the amplifier SynAmps2 and the amplifier NuAmps, respectively.
On the left/right side, the first and second columns are signals collected from the Cz and Oz channels, respectively.

Show All



From Table IV, we find that when the calibration data of the test subject are extremely limited, instead of using these limited data to train the model from scratch, it is better to use a model trained with a dataset collected from a large number of other subjects, even if the calibration phase is completely eliminated.
Adding a short-time calibration phase and fine-tuning the pretrained model will further improve the accuracy.

The results of fine-tuning in Table IV demonstrate that fine-tuning can help enhance the cross-subject and cross-amplifier performances significantly.
After fine-tuning with data of only 5 trials, in all 6 training and independent test set situations, none of the subjects in the independent test set had an accuracy below 50%.
In between fully-calibrated and calibration-free, the short-time fine-tuning strategy is practically very meaningful, which can obtain large performance gain without sacrificing much of the user convenience.
Such fine-tuning is widely used in transfer learning related methods, which is also a merit of CNN-based methods like ours relative to traditional methods.

From the results of the simulated online test presented in Table III, all 50 subjects in the group for the independent test set had an average accuracy of 75.34% after 6.04 flash rounds.
Furthermore, we investigated the simulated online performances of the subjects who had cross-subject accuracies above 85% in the offline analysis, and the results are shown in Table VII in Appendix B.
These subjects accounted for 56.66% of the total number of subjects and achieved an average accuracy of 85.93% after an average of 5.37 rounds of button flashes in the simulated online test.
Such performance is nearly equivalent to that of subject-specific calibration systems, according to our experience.
Thus, it is appropriate to build an online subject-independent system for this portion of subjects.
In the offline analyses, the average time needed for forward propagation through the CNN was 1.683 ms per trial (10 flash rounds).
Therefore, it is feasible to modify this offline system as a real-time online system.
That is, a CNN model can be trained in advance with data from a large number of subjects and then applied to new users.

Whether a new user is suitable for cross-subject learning can be determined by using one of the following two methods.
First, the new user should attempt to use the online system without subject-specific calibration.
If possible, feedback of the user’s accuracy can be directly obtained to evaluate the cross-subject learning performance of the subject.
Otherwise, since we found a positive correlation between the maximum probability of the presence of P300 and the accuracy, which is mentioned in Section II-H and detailed in Appendix D, whether the user is likely to achieve a good performance can be estimated based on the maximum probability of the presence of P300.
If the user can achieve high accuracy in the cross-subject test, then he/she can continue using the system without subject-specific calibration.
Otherwise, the user should perform the subject-specific calibration task, and the system will use the data collected in the calibration phase to fine-tune a subject-specific model.

Compared with existing deep learning-based transfer learning methods for BCI, our method has the following advantages.
First, the dataset used in our study is large, including data of 200 subjects, which is approximately 5–10 times more data than that in most existing studies [25], [40].
The large number of subjects provides the possibility of extracting subject-independent ERP features and makes the results more statistically universal.
Second, a small amount of data from the test subjects is generally used to fine-tune the model in existing studies on transfer learning.
However, we conducted a test in which no data of test subjects was used to fine-tune the CNN model and achieve good performances.
Thus, our method is effective for subject-independent P300 BCIs.
Furthermore, as presented in Appendix B, more than 60% of the subjects achieved accuracies higher than 80%, and more than 50% of the subjects achieved accuracies higher than 85%.
For these subjects, the subject-specific calibration stage can be entirely eliminated.
In addition, less than 40% of subjects has accuracies lower than 80%.
We can use a small amount of data of test subjects to fine-tune the CNN model to improve the performance of cross-subject classification for these subjects with unsatisfactory performances.

We used a paradigm that is different from the traditional P300 speller paradigm.
The traditional P300 speller paradigm takes one row/column instead of one button as a flash unit.
In this way, the number of flashes is much less than the number of buttons so that the flashing time of a round can be greatly reduced.
However, this approach introduces a serious shortcoming to the traditional paradigm.
If the row and column of the target character flash just one next to another in a certain round, then the subject will have difficulty distinguishing the two flashes, which makes the latter flash hardly evoke the P300 component.
Moreover, in the free spelling phase, since the target is unknown to the speller system, this situation cannot be surely avoided in such a paradigm.
To address this issue, we took one character rather than one row/column as a flash unit.
We then designed a paradigm in which the button flashes overlap to reduce the flashing time.
The approach of overlapping flashing would have an impact on EEG signals; i.e., the EEG segments corresponding to the buttons whose flashes were adjacent to the target button flashes in the time domain would contain components that have the same waveform as P300 but a slight time shift.
To alleviate this impact, in each trial, we averaged the signals corresponding to multiple rounds for each button as in Eq.
(2) in Section II-D.
After the averaging operation, the P300 component of the signals corresponding to the flashes of the target button can be enhanced.
In contrast, for nontarget buttons, due to the randomness of the flash sequence for each round, this component would not appear at the same time of its multiple flash rounds and thus will become weak after averaging.
Therefore, the EEG signals corresponding to the target and nontarget can be distinguishable.

It is also worth noting that although our CNN architecture was carefully designed and very important to the success of our study, we do not claim that the CNN architecture itself is a key contribution of this paper.
The main contribution of this paper is that we found that cross-subjects and cross-amplifier classification models could be established for subject-independent P300 BCIs using a large training dataset, which would substantially improve the applications of P300 BCIs.
In fact, as we experimentally showed in Section III-C, similar network structures, such as EEGNet [26], and linear classifiers, such as SVM [41] and LDA [42], may also be effective for analyzing our data to achieve results comparable to ours.
However, if the dataset is too large (e.g., much larger than the dataset in this study) or has an extremely high number of dimensions, then an SVM and LDA may not be appropriate for this task due to the requirement of solving a large-scale optimization problem or inverting a very large matrix.
Moreover, a CNN allows training with a pretraining-retraining method.
In the situation where a small amount of calibration data can be collected from the test subject, a CNN can be pretrained in advance with data collected from a large number of other subjects and then fine-tuned with the calibration data.
In this way, at a small cost, a CNN will significantly outperform the other algorithms that are generally trained from scratch.

