05 Conclusion and Future Work

This study has analyzed the effects of following a trend, how significant is to follow a research trend in the field of Computer Science area and the impact of FoS trend on research paper citations. We have employed the Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) of research papers published during the years 2007-2011. In MAG, every paper has a list of FoS. The study has presented a rigorous analysis of three important aspects pertaining to scientific trend detection: (1) similarity between citation trend of papers belonging to the same fields, (2) An alternate to citation count measure for trend detection in FoS and nature of relation between the FoS that belonging to the same fields.

We have introduced a novel FoS multigraph (FoM) technique to detect the trends in FoS and analyzed the trends with the help of centrality measures and frequency. The trendy FoS over a specific time are discovered by analyzing the constructed FoM and frequency. The FoS in MAG are systematized hierarchically into 4 levels; level-0 – level-3. In this study, we have applied the clustering technique on level-1 FoS and citations pattern separately. The Rand Index has been used to find the similarity between two data clustering, and correlation coefficient has been employed to find the relationship between FoS citations pattern.

The experimental results show that there is a similarity between clusters formed on the basis of FoS and citations pattern and there also exists a relationship between FoS citations pattern that belong to the same FoS. The results indicate that FoS holds a certain impact on the citation count. Further, if the papers belong to the same FoS, then there are 66% of chances that they hold a same citation trend as they also achieved high correlation value.

This proves that an FoS has a certain impact on the citation count of a research paper and researchers need to consider the trend of an FoS while selecting a particular research area. The study shows that the established approach is general and might be practical to achieve knowledge of different research fields. For future studies, we will apply the author-topic model, a probabilistic model to connect authors to detected FoS in the scientific literature, which will show the common structure for study.

