01 Introduction

Modern societies continue to have female- or male-dominant industries and vocations [1], [2]. Historically, this division has occurred due to different requirements for physical strength and personal qualities, as well as cultural stereotypes regarding gender roles. For instance, firefighters and police officers needed to possess imposing figures, high strength, and endurance. In contrast, women tended to end up in care and support careers, working as nurses, secretaries, and assistants (if they were allowed to have a career at all). With most industries introducing new technologies, digitalization, and robotics, many physical tasks have been taken over by machines, and the previously male-dominant professions are beginning to accept women as equal members with realistic career prospects [3]. In other words, societies are undergoing digitalization with cross-industry collaboration [4] and are moving to new types of technology-assisted and automated jobs [5] that require knowledge competencies rather than typically male-related characteristics, such as physical strength. However, the gender gap persists in many areas that should be gender-neutral [6]. For example, fields such as computer science (CS), physics, and mechanical engineering remain male-dominated despite there being no reason for this [7], [8]; in fact, during the development of the first computers and programming languages, women were active, equal participants [9].

The gender gap in CS is highly noticeable in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields [8], [10]. According to Statista, a global developer survey showed that only 8% of software engineers are women [11]. At the same time, in global societies, men, women, and non-binary individuals are all software users. Therefore, the absence of an important portion of representatives from all user groups in software development jobs may lead to product deficiencies for some users and, consequently, to dissatisfaction. Moreover, diversity brings innovative ideas and stimulates knowledge sharing and innovative thinking [12], [13]. For example, studies have shown that companies with more women exhibit better innovative performance [14]. Furthermore, a good gender balance in the SE industry may lead to better software product quality because diverse teams have a better understanding of different users’ needs and high innovational potential [6], [12], [14], [15]. However, although research has been conducted on how to transform specific courses, programs, and/or intensive software engineering (SE) educative events to improve gender balance, this topic requires further, deeper research. Gender imbalance in the technology industry begins in childhood and is present at each step of educational and career choices. Based on the norms accepted in society, boys and girls are raised differently and subsequently choose different career pathways [16]. Even in more equal countries, such as the Nordics, there are clear indications that boys are steered toward engineering, technology, and science tracks, whereas girls, who as a group generally have higher grade averages, are steered toward generalist electives, such as philosophy, psychology, and economics [17].

This study examined state-of-the-art academic research in major databases to map the status quo in the selected research area: gender research in SE and CS tertiary education. The paper is focused on studies addressing female inclusiveness in university-level SE education. The hypothesis was that there are multiple diverse ways to reduce the gender gap by fighting stereotypes, accommodating and considering female trades and needs, and rearranging the learning process and programs to make them more inviting and valuable for both men and women alike. The objective was to systematize the relevant literature about gender-inclusive CS educational programs and to establish the background for a deep literary analysis.

The following sections describe the background of the study, the research method, and the findings from the Systematic Mapping Study. The study presents literature sample quality analysis, regional research distribution, and the studies’ focus area analysis. It also provides ideas and recommendations for future research directions and the most common practices for achieving gender balance in CS and SE tertiary education from the literature.

