02 Theoretical Background

Despite the steps already taken toward gender equality in many countries, the low persistence of women in the technology sector remains an issue to be solved [1]. The low female interest has been explained by researchers by reference to social factors, such as the pressure of stereotypes, dominant social norms, and habits [18]. For example, one sociocultural habit involves encouraging girls to develop creativity, while boys are encouraged to develop mathematical and technical skills from an early age [19]. At school, educators can influence students’ career decisions based on social norms [20]. Young women who are not confident in their technical abilities, who were told to follow the norms, and who do not have any unorthodox role models will likely choose female-dominant fields in tertiary-level education [8], [18]. Even if girls decide to enter the STEM field by choosing an educational program in the technology field and later a technology-related career, there is still a considerable risk that they will feel discomfort and drop out of school or switch to another career path [21], [22]. In addition, although the dropout rates in the STEM fields are similar between the genders, women are far less likely than men to switch to STEM fields, even if they have prior education in other areas [17]. In this context, girls on the technology career track fall into the stereotype cycle illustrated in Figure 1. Thus, due to the pressure of social norms, girls tend to choose stereotypical educational tracks, favoring historically female-dominated fields. As a result, the existing ratio of men and women in engineering is maintained, which produces a constant lack of female role models. When there are no role models, it is harder to resist stereotypes, and there is even room for the emergence of new ones, which may further strengthen the social norms influencing girls’ career decisions.

The cycle of stereotypes.

Show All



For a person to get out of the cycle, it is necessary to exclude at least one element, preferably several elements, from the cycle. The same goes for the entire society, which is a significantly greater problem than the personal-level situation. For example, at the personal level, one can change the company they work for and thus find an environment in which one or more elements of the cycle are absent. At the societal level, the activity of an increased number of role models may show that women are perfectly capable of coping with “male” positions, thus disproving stereotypes [23]. A large enough sample of proof will weaken the stereotypes that are currently accepted as de facto thinking lines in society, leading to positive changes [24] if there are no other barriers to preventing this development.

Some universities around the world are implementing different measures to attract more female students to male-dominant programs. For instance, Tsui recommends recruiting women into male-dominant programs by emphasizing and focusing on the value of such programs to society [25]. Cheryan and colleagues removed masculine-coded objects, such as Star Trek posters, from classroom interiors and reported positive female reactions [26]. Likewise, universities in Chile increased female admission from 19% to 32% by adding 40 places only for women [23]. Big-tech companies are also involved in attracting women to the field. For instance, Spotify [27] organized a female-inclusive hackathon, achieving an almost 50/50 gender balance. Although hackathons are generally project-oriented programming competitions [28], Spotify’s strategy was to open the event for people without prior experience or knowledge and reduce the competitional aspect.

These examples of academic and industrial actions show that the gender gap in the technology sector is a global issue being addressed by various “players.” However, although there are positive initiatives, knowledge of them is scarce, and the activities remain eclectic. Therefore, this study aimed to comprehensively map the literature on female-inclusive SE and CS tertiary-level study programs and to help overcome the fragmentation of existing female-inclusive activities in higher education. In the following sections, this systematic mapping study (SMS) will pinpoint the current studies, measures, and focus areas related to this phenomenon in higher education and identify directions for future research.

