06 Conclusion

In recent decades, society has been actively moving toward gender equality. However, the gender gap in SE and CS remains and needs to be closed. The literature shows that the main reason may be the fact that women face stereotypes and discrimination related to their career perspectives at different ages. As university members, the authors were particularly interested in how the experience of female students can be improved and how the gender balance in SE and CS faculties can be achieved.

Drawing on state-of-the-art studies on female-inclusive SE and CS university programs, this SMS study was made. The goal was to map existing studies and identify directions for a systematic literature review. For this purpose, different keyword sets were developed and tested to gather the most relevant sample. Then, these keywords were used in five databases: ACM, IEEE, Scopus, Web of Science, and Science Direct. The final sample of 143 publications was selected by reading the titles, abstracts, and full texts before classifying the publications for further analysis.

Based on the context of the publications, the studies could be divided into those focused on courses or initiatives (46), university-level activities (81), and the broader context (16). The results of the analyzed studies indicate that minor changes can be made at the course level and that such measures are easier to test in practice. Most publications (64) focused on changes to the learning process. A large portion of the sample (49) considered practical tests of measures for implementation in university education. There are already tested interventions that universities can use to create a female-inclusive environment. Still, given the size of the challenge, authors see this to be just a positive-spirited starting point, in great need of extensive addition to receive researched, tested, and practically confirmed models, distributed openly and globally to more efficiently start to tackle this wicked problem. In the found literature, 35 publications proposed female-inclusive activities, and 59 examined and explained the existing gender gap in SE and CS education.

For future research, the authors recommend seeking new insights into the issue by extending participation and motivation in the context of females and STEM/ICT careers, job selections, and technology knowledge positions to translate the findings into study program development goals. Also, this study’s findings suggest a need to continue performing deep literature analysis and testing the findings in different social and cultural contexts to combine all the knowledge and design a gender-inclusive SE or CS program.

