02 Methods

During the experiment, EEG data were collected at a sampling rate of 250 Hz, with a 30-channel EEG cap (LT 37) that followed the extended 10–20 system (see Fig. 1), and signals were referenced to the right mastoid. A 64-channel amplifier SynAmps2 (Compumedics, Neuroscan, Inc., Australia) and a 40-channel amplifier NuAmps (Compumedics, Neuroscan, Inc., Australia) were used to collect EEG signals for every subject. All electrode impedances were maintained below 5 during data collection, as determined by dynamically monitoring the impedance values displayed on the screen of the connected computer.

The positions of the 30 channels.

Show All



This study employs a P300 speller for data collection with the graphical user interface (GUI) shown in Fig. 2 [32]. Each subject was presented with a button matrix of characters. In each trial, the subject selectively focused on one of the 40 buttons, which were intensified according to the paradigm shown in Fig. 3, to input a character. Specifically, to prepare the subject, during the 3 seconds before stimulus onset, the buttons were not intensified. Upon onset, all 40 buttons start to flash successively in a random order. Here, we made the buttons flash in a random order rather than in a fixed order to enhance the oddball effect so that the P300 component can be detected when the target button flashes. Each flash lasted for 100 ms, and the interval between the onsets of two successive flashes was 30 ms, which means that an overlap of 70 ms existed between any pair of successive flashes. A round consisted of 40 button flashes (one button corresponds to one flash per round), and 10 rounds comprised a trial. Furthermore, no pause was used between adjacent rounds. Thus, it took a total of ms to complete the 400 flashes.

Graphical user interface of the P300 speller.

Show All

Illustration of the experimental paradigm. For the input of a single character in a trial, to prepare the subject, the buttons are not initially intensified. Ten rounds were included for each trial, and each round consisted of 40 button flashes. Upon onset, all 40 buttons start to flash successively in a random order. Each flash lasts for 100 ms, and the interval between the onsets of two successive flashes is 30 ms, which means that there is an overlap of 70 ms between any pair of successive flashes. Thus, it takes a total of 12.07 s to complete the 400 flashes in a trial. Note that the flash sequences of different rounds and different trials are different, and the sequence “C, K, A, , F” shown in this figure is just a possible sequence.

Show All



Two hundred healthy subjects (168 males and 32 females, between 18 and 32 years of age) participated in our experiment. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Sichuan Provincial Rehabilitation Hospital, China (the cooperative institution). Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. During the experiment, the subjects were instructed to focus their attention on the flashes of specified characters (i.e., targets) in each trial and to keep a running mental count of the number of the flashes while their EEG signals were recorded. Each subject performed 120 trials, with each trial corresponding to a character input using the two amplifiers, as mentioned in Section II-A (60 trials per amplifier). To avoid subject fatigue caused by long-term experiments, which would affect data quality, for each subject, the experiment containing 120 trials was divided into 4 sessions, each of which contained 30 trials. Between any pair of successive sessions, the subject had rest time. Only when the subject was in a good condition would the next session be started. Note that the sequence of 60 characters for each subject and each amplifier was randomly produced before the experiment began.

The collected EEG data were used in the following cross-subject data analysis, including both the offline analysis and the simulated online test. The 200 subjects were divided into two groups: 150 subjects for training and validation and the other 50 subjects for an independent test. In the remainder of this paper, we denote the subsets of the dataset using the symbols shown in Table I. Each symbol, e.g., TrV-S-150, includes three parts. The first part indicates the dataset: “TrV” refers to the training and validation set, while “Te” refers to the independent test set. The second part indicates the amplifier: “S” and “N” refer to the SynAmps2 amplifier and the NuAmps amplifier, respectively, and “SN” refers to both amplifiers. The third part, “ ”, refers to the number of subjects in the subset. For example, “TrV-SN-149” refers to the data of 149 of the 150 subjects in the training and validation set collected by both amplifiers.



where and are the unnormalized and normalized signals of channel at sampling point , respectively, and and are the average and standard deviation of the signal of channel in the epoch, respectively. This normalization is meant to avoid undesirable biases to facilitate signal classification.

In the training phase, only were fed into the deep neural network, while in the prediction/test phase, was set to different values to show the change in performance with respect to the number of flash rounds.

A sample was labeled as a positive sample if and only if the corresponding character was the target of the current trial. Before being fed into the network, the preprocessed training data underwent another normalization process: the conventional zero-mean unit-variance normalization widely used in CNN training to improve convergence [35]. In the prediction/test phase, the test samples were also normalized using the mean and standard deviation of the training set.

As shown in Fig. 4, the model used for cross-subject P300 detection was a CNN, which is similar to the network used in [24]. It contains 3 convolutional layers (denoted as “C”) and 2 fully connected layers (denoted as “FC”). Each input sample is a matrix. The first convolutional layer filters the preprocessed signal with 10 kernels sized and a stride of 1, resulting in 10 feature maps sized . Each map of this layer plays a role in channel combination. The second and third convolutional layers both take the outputs of the previous layers as inputs and filter them with 10 kernels sized and , respectively, and a stride of 1. Therefore, the output of the third convolutional layer contains 10 feature maps sized . These two layers play a role in temporal filtering. The last 2 layers are both fully connected layers with neurons and 1 neuron, respectively. Here, we set the lengths of the kernels and and the number of neurons as variables that will be determined later. All layers except FC5 use the rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the activation function. The output of the last fully connected layer, FC5, is passed to the sigmoid function . For the P300 detection problem, samples with the presence of P300 are regarded as positive samples, while samples with the absence of P300 are regarded as negative samples. If the labels assigned to the negative and positive samples are 0 and 1, respectively, then the output of the sigmoid function can be regarded as the modeled probability of the presence of , where is the input of the network. The binary label represents the presence of P300, while represents the absence of P300.

The architecture of the CNN used for cross-subject P300 detection.

Show All



The total number of the trainable parameters of the convolutional kernels is , and that of the fully connected layers is . Here, 1’s are added to represent the number of biases. The kernels of the convolutional layers and the weights of the fully connected layers are regularized with regularization constraints.

The choices of the hyperparameters associated with the network structure can be explained as follows. We first set the kernel size for the convolutional layer C1 (associated with the channel dimension) to because this layer played a role in combining all of the 30 channels. Next, the kernel lengths and for convolutional layers C2 and C3 (associated with the time dimension) and the number of neurons for the fully connected layer FC4 were determined using a grid search strategy. Specifically, we considered a number of candidates for these hyperparameters. Note that the kernel lengths and physically determined the temporal window sizes used for feature extraction, where the input data had 25 sample points along the time dimension. We set several kernel lengths as candidates for and . We also set several numbers of neurons of the fully connected layer FC4 (i.e., ) as candidates. We then evaluated these hyperparameters experimentally. The data of 10 randomly selected subjects from a training and validation set were used for validation, and the data of the remaining 140 subjects were used for training. The hyperparameters with the highest average accuracy over the 10 validation subjects were chosen as the optimal hyperparameters. For example, the hyperparameters , , and were chosen as 8, 10, and 15, respectively, for the training and validation set TrV-SN-150.

The convolutional kernels and weights of the network were initialized with the Xavier initialization method [36]. The model was trained using Adam [37], a method for stochastic optimization, to optimize the mean-square error (MSE). Since the dataset is imbalanced, with a ratio of positive to negative samples of , the loss function was weighted by multiplying positive samples by 39 [26]. The model was trained on an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU, with CUDA 9.0 and cuDNN v7, using TensorFlow, an open-source machine learning framework [38].

For the cross-subject and within-amplifier/cross-amplifier independent tests, the models were respectively trained on three training sets (i.e., TrV-S-150, TrV-N-150, and TrV-SN-150) containing data from 150 subjects, and they were tested on two independent test sets (i.e., Te-S-50 and Te-N-50) containing data from the other 50 subjects. In this paper, we adopted accuracy, defined as the ratio of the number of correctly input characters to the total number of input characters, as the performance metric.

View Source

In the simulated online test, the number of rounds of button flashes for each trial is adaptive according to the confidence of making a decision. In this way, the system achieves a better balance between accuracy and spelling speed. For an adaptive online system, it is essential to find a criterion for determining when to make decisions. As described in Section II-E, the output value corresponding to the input is regarded as the probability of the presence of , which indicates the confidence of making a decision. This characteristic raises the following questions: Is this probability relevant to the accuracy, and can it be further used to determine whether to make a decision?

which indicates the confidence of making a decision for subject in trial after flash rounds. View Source

We denote the accuracy (%) for subject after flash rounds as . As will be presented in Appendix D, we found a positive correlation between and . This finding inspired us to use the output of the network to determine whether to make a decision and automatically stop the current trial in each flash round in the online test.

We first set the minimum and maximum numbers of flash rounds for making a decision, i.e., , , and a threshold of the probability for each flash round, i.e., . For subject in trial , once , is calculated according to Eq. (4) and then compared with . If , then the system outputs as the prediction. Otherwise, the next round of button flashes progresses until or . If reaches and still has not reached the threshold , then the system outputs as the prediction.

