02 Related Work

In literature, researchers have proposed different techniques for trend detection and analysis. A citation network is proposed for temporal ordering [7] of documents to detect topic evolution and embryonic trends from data and formerly use citations to calculate the loads for the key terms in papers. Research papers’ data is synchronized to a classification of areas built on the important words from the titles and abstracts and is studied to capture the variations in the number of publications linked with such topics using a citation network [16]. However, as [8] pointed out, in citation network, keywords of research papers are not pre-processed and do not show the significance of research topic areas in various scenarios, different keywords of papers even present similar topics.

A network of co-occurring [9] keywords in scientific data and detected the growth in period of the link weights is used to identify trends and emergent research topic areas. Patent analysis, bibliometric study, and text-mining analysis techniques [10] are used to identify research trends. A method proposed [5] compares the scattering of keywords extracted from the research data using citation graphs associated with publications encompassing these keywords. The method assumes that if a keyword term is suitable for a topic area then the research papers encompassing the keyword will have a strong link to paper content. However, the technique is not well suited for areas which are in their early stage of the process.

A common technique is created on the usage of keywords as substitutes for research topics. In this situation, each keyword typically signifies a particular topic. This technique can be defined as a keyword-based topic model. A technique proposed by [11] analyzes keywords to detect trends in the scientific literature. Two-dimensional text mining approaches including clustering and bibliometric analysis of keywords is used to analyze the knowledge structure of scientific research of the journal. Similarly, there exists another approach that creates paper-topic relationships by using keywords and words mined from the abstract to study the trends of topics on diverse time scales [21].

To identify topic trends, it is promising to define a topic state according to features such as the number of associated publications/citations [12] the number of authors energetic in it [13] and accordingly observe their evolution over the time. Also, the relational topic modeling which chains network structure and LDA of papers to model topic areas unit citation networks and LDA [14] is used to discourse the issue of topic evolution.

The method identifies topics in autonomous subsets of data and influences citations to link topics in altered periods. A hybrid approach [15] detects the growth and decline in trends of research topics, however, it does not detect early research trends. The hybrid approach combines the PLSA for topic modeling in a window that slides through the stream of paper to study the topic growth. For a researcher, only selecting the location for its publication is not a good choice for paper acceptance, numerous aspects must also be considered, such as the listeners he/she is inscription for, the research topic area, and likewise the venue/location strategies [16]. Though, new procedures of self-archiving, like blogs, describe an exciting substitute, which is gradually castoff in a few research groups. Research articles are generally related to a titles of research topics, which are normally contingent by the keywords identified by the researchers [17] or mined from the manuscript with automatic approaches. Research topics are explored and examined by authors and their groups for several aims, such as determining innovative information and producing innovative approaches [18].

A research study identifies trends in CS especially its relationship with research funding [19] using ACM and IEEE papers with research fields based on ACM and IEEE classifications. In literature, keyword-based, graph-based, and bibliometric approaches are used for trend detection and analysis in scientific articles. The most common way to study the research trend is citation count [3]. However, analysis of FoS trends in the field of Computer Science has not been given adequate attention by the scientific community.

Our study is closely related to [19] which identifies FoS scores to investigate general publication trends, citation trends, the evolution of research areas in Computer Science. Based on the critical analysis of the literature review, the identified research gap is a lack of study that investigates the association between the trend of FoS and the new papers being written in that FoS. This may be a useful consideration, especially for new researchers in terms of making a decision to pick a particular FoS to conduct research. The gap has led us to formulate the following research questions (RQs):

How similar is the citation trend of papers belonging to the same fields?

Can we use any measure other than citation count to detect the trend of FoS?

Is there any relationship between different fields of study?



