01 Introduction

The volume and diversity of scientific literature are increasing at an exponential rate due to enormous inventions in science. Almost 2.5 million scientific articles are published every year and the amount gets doubled after every five-year [1], [2]. The articles are published by different venues, such as conferences and journals and released to the wider community by digital libraries such as Google Scholar, Citeseer, DBLP etc. These libraries index the publications in a hierarchical manner wherein each node of a hierarchy corresponds to a particular field of study (FoS) [10]. The dynamic increase in the research plethora has made it difficult for the scientific community to discover hidden patterns from a particular field of study (FoS). The FoS determines the area of focus of a particular scientific article. For instance, a paper focusing on comparison between different machine learning algorithms like Naïve Bayes, Support Vector Machine etc. will belong to the FoS, “Machine Learning” or “Artificial Intelligence” [10]. Typically, the inclination of the scientific community towards certain fields of study (FoS) is more among other fields due to emerging of trends in the field. Due to the dynamic increase in the research plethora, it becomes difficult for the scientific community to detect trends in a particular FoS. A research trend is a the research general direction followed by researchers during a specified period of time and is defined as, an area that is evolving and grabbing importance over time [1]. Publications by a large group of researchers in the same FoS may form a trend, resulting in increased popularity of the FoS among other fields.

A pioneering researcher typically opts for a field that is more popular or its trends are being followed by the wider scientific community. This is done based on an assumption that contemplation of these aspects may increase the acceptance probability of the piece of work done in the trendy FoS, and further lead towards the rapid gain of citations in future [3]. In scientific literature, following the research trends and dynamics can hold noteworthy benefits and this is significant to specify the interest of researchers. Following a research trend does not mean traditionalism to plan at great or yielding to symmetry; rather it indicates having dynamic awareness regarding innovative intuition [3].

To date, the scientific community has presented different studies to determine flow or trend of scientific literature. The traditional trend detection-based studies rely on bibliometric indices involving key parameters like publication count and citation count [3]. The prime purpose of these studies is to discover the topic areas that are growing in interest over the time; trend analysis is performed to collect information and discover a pattern from data [2]. In literature, the centrality measures has been extensively studied in the field of social network analysis [15]. Surprisingly, a very few attempts have been made to apply such measures for keywords extraction, wherein degree centrality is used [25]. The citation count is considered as one of the potential bibliometric indices to discover trend or flow of a research [3]. These studies have overlooked a few important aspects which are the focus of our study.

To the best of our knowledge: (i) there are no published experiments on: (i) the significance of FoS trend following, (ii) centrality measures to analyze FoS trend and their relationships and if (iii) researchers follow FoS trend, this creates a high impact on research paper citations. This study uses the scientific articles published in the domain of Computer Science and analyses:

What is the impact of FoS on citation count by evaluating how similar is the citation trend of papers belonging to the same fields?

Can we use any measure other than citation count to detect the trend of FoS?

Is there any relationship between different fields of study?



One major difficulty in addressing these issues is the availability of relevant data, that is, a worthy source of dataset is required. Since bibliographic datasets having features like title, authors, conference, and journal information in the field of Computer Science are not so hard to acquire as DBLP [4] freely provides this metadata in a structured manner. However, features like citations, keywords, and FoS are harder to acquire as they are not available in the form as DBLP provides other features.

Discovering the FoS of a research paper is itself a research problem. Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) is provides a rich source of dataset making it easier to acquire such a dataset [5]. Precisely, MAG has a study that depicts a relationship between research papers and their corresponding field of study (FoS) in a hierarchical manner [6]. In MAG, every paper has a list of FoS. The FoS in MAG are systematized hierarchically into 4 levels; level-0 – level-3 with level-0 being the most general FoS, e.g., Computer Science and level-3 being the most specific e.g., cluster analysis.

In this research, we use the MAG dataset of conference papers to analyze FoS trend and their impact on research paper citations. We perform clustering on FoS and citations pattern separately. We present a novel method Field of Study Multigraph (FoM), formed by using centrality measures, degree, betweenness and closeness to analyze the field of study trend, citation trend, and the relation between research areas in Computer Science scientific articles. The frequency of FoS in papers is also calculated to detect FoS trend. The study calculates a Rand Index to find the similarity between two data clustering’s to analyze the impact of FoS on citation count.

Finally, we use the correlation coefficient to find the nature of a relation between FoS and citation patterns. The outcomes of the study revealed that the papers belonging to the same FoS have similar citations pattern. Furthermore, citations pattern can also be estimated against a particular FoS and if a paper belongs to the same field of study, then there are 66% of the chances that they have the same citation trend as they also achieved high correlation value. This proves that a field of study has a certain impact on the citation count of a paper and researchers should also contemplate the trend of a field of study while selecting a particular research area.

This paper is structured as follows; Section II discusses the related work and section III discusses the proposed methodology. Section IV examines experimental results and in section V we conclude the paper.

