04 Discussion

In this section, we discuss the impact of our bibliometric analysis on our understanding of the landscape of retention studies in computing. From our observation, publications rose steadily from 2013 at 2.98% growth, with 2018 accounting for 226 articles but decreased suddenly to 105 publications between 2020 to 2021. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic might have impacted the number of articles produced (e.g. due to canceled conferences and decreased productivity of researchers). We do not believe that this decline reflects a decline in CS attrition. On the contrary, a recent study conducted by Mooney and Becker [47] mentioned that attrition rates increased as the COVID-19 pandemic continued. Similarly, Albarakati et al. [48] (2021) revealed that underrepresented minorities might even suffer attrition more significantly as a result of the pandemic.

In terms of where the articles have been published, our study reveals the importance of this topic across a range of communities. The top venues for this research include a set of journals and conferences that include both those that specifically focus on computing education (e.g. Elsevier Computers and Education, ACM Transactions on Computing Education) and more general education-focused venues (e.g. IEEE Transactions on Education, IEEE Frontiers in Education). This range of publication venues indicates that the problem of CS attrition is not just of narrow interest to those directly involved in the field of computing, but a problem that is important to the broader education community. Moreover the venues where this work is published are of high quality and impact. For example, the Computers and Education journal appeared to be the top-most published source with 24 publications by the year 2022. The Computers and Education journal is one of the leading journal in educational technology with a long publication history. According to Clarivate Analytics, a Web of Science Group, publishing annual report on journal citation, for 2022, Computers & Education journal was ranked second best with impact factor (IF) 11.25 which is next after the Review of Educational Research journal topmost with IF 13.55. Other journals and conferences on the list are also highly ranked. There may be other studies that are sent to lower-impact venues that do not appear in Scopus or the Web of Science which our study did not observe, but the presence of this work in high-impact venues signals the growing importance of this topic in the field.

It is interesting to note that the United States dominates the publication count in this area. This is likely at least in part due to the size of the United States and the large number of US research universities. This trend does not imply that attrition is a bigger problem in the US compared to other countries, though our study cannot rule that out either.

According to the conceptual structure analysis results, the four quadrants showing the trends of topic over time were considered. These quadrants consisted of niche, motor, basic, and emerging or declining themes. This study revealed that “computer programming” remain the only emerging theme in attrition studies focusing on computer science. While other themes such as “active learning” and “computer science education” are relevant and basic topics in attrition studies, “computer programming” seems to be the major focus connected to students” attrition. This finding buttressed the overarching and known knowledge about how programming education is difficult for students to excel in and need more time and resources to thrive [8]. Therefore, students may dropout of pursuing a computing degree because they could not comprehend and develop computer programming skills due to its difficulty. The implication of this finding is that more interventions tailored towards facilitating students’ programming education may be needed to improve retention in computer science as alluded by previous studies [1], [49].

The analysis of trending topics as revealed by the temporal keyword growth from 2000 to 2022 indicates that authors have focused their attention on student “retention” in the last two decades. Apparently, computer science researchers, for example, Cohoon [50], Cuny and Aspray [51], emphasised how to improve retention of female in computer science degree. Aside from computer science, other fields are showcasing research on student retention by investigating several characteristics with the aim to develop educational environments to foster students success [52], [53]. Thus, students’ retention remain a hot research topic since it is relevant and critical to measuring educational success and whether academic strategies are meeting the learning needs of a given society [54]. Additionally, this study revealed that scholars researching students’ attrition in computer science education are widening their scope by investigating computing education in general, including additional discipline-specific areas such as computer engineering, information systems, and software engineering [11].

