05 Conclusion

This study provides insights into research on student attrition. It took a unique approach to qualitatively analyze relevant articles on student attrition through the lenses of bibliometric review study, with a focus on the context of computer science education. Our study serves as a guide to young and emerging researchers aiming to shape their research prospects on attrition in computer science education. For example, our analysis unveiled useful information about publication trends, venues, active institutions and countries, temporal keyword dynamics, and popular keywords used in this domain. With the findings of this study, young scholars in this field would have an overview of where to publish their relevant research, and how to position their research to focus on hot and trending topics. In addition, this study is relevant to scholars in this community as it visualizes the scientific progression witnessed in the field within the last two decades. For educators, administrators, and other stakeholders, this study provides relevant information that can guide strategic planning and preparation for the future in order to address more issues related to student retention as a measure of academic success in the field.

This study is not without limitations. As is common with review studies, some of the actions taken to concretize the research procedure in accordance with the methodology adopted in this study may expose the study to certain limitations. For example, our bibliometric analysis excluded non-English articles. We acknowledge that this exclusion of articles written in languages other than English might lead to incomplete coverage of the study. However, due to the global recognition of English, this influence on our results might be insignificant. Another limitation is the lack of exhaustiveness of the data collected for our analysis, which the authors admit. Nevertheless, the extensive keywords used in conducting the search strategy for relevant data from two popular databases (Scopus and Web of Science) validate the measures taken to mitigate this limitation. In addition to the aforementioned limitations, it is important to note another significant constraint on our study. Both the University of Texas and the University of California are extensive public university systems with numerous campuses, departments, programs, and administrative bodies. However, due to their vastness and complexity, Scopus and Web of Science often conflate them into a single entity, leading to inaccuracies in research metrics and evaluations. As a result, the data we used to analyze the research productivity and impact of these universities may not fully capture the breadth and diversity of their contributions in our analysis. This limitation should be taken into consideration when interpreting our findings and drawing conclusions about the research performance of these institutions.

The study concludes by emphasizing the scientific progress made in the study of students’ retention in computer science education as showcased by relevant research. Nevertheless, it draws the attention of stakeholders to the need for developing more strategies to create a niche in this domain, as current studies are primarily focused on computer programming while other areas of computing have received little attention.

