01 Introduction

It is estimated that 1 in every 160 children has an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) [4] Autism is described as an invasive developmental disorder that causes life-long difficulties in the social and communicative fields [9]. These difficulties vary and depend on many factors, including the degree of cognitive impairment faced [5]. The treatment for autism should be structured according to the stage of life and specific difficulties faced by the patient [6]. With the progress of technology and its various fields of application, people with autism may rely on the use of technologies that help in the development of their capabilities [7]. These technologies are known as Assistive Technology systems. However, to develop technology for people with autism, it is necessary to understand their neurodiversity [14], [15].

The term “Assistive Technology” (AT) is applied to the range of equipment, services, strategies, and practices designed and implemented to ease the functional problems faced by people with disabilities [8], and can also help to improve their skills. This area of knowledge was considered one of the challenges to be addressed in computing research, given the inevitability of enhancing the user’s experience with computers, whether they face disabilities or not [2], [3], [28]. Thus, to meet the demand of users with different characteristics, including physical and cognitive limitations, the solutions need to consider the integration of multiple perspectives, such as computation, psychology, and neuroscience.

Computational research involving assistive technologies are very diverse. There are many studies aimed at developing hardware, software, robots, application with virtual reality, among others. A quick look at search indexers for the word “autism” in the computing area reveals 2169 studies in the last five years (search in the SCOPUS’ database, 2015–2019). When considering that other areas also produce studies involving technologies, this number is much higher. In this article, our search was restricted to studies involving review and mapping, because an indirect strategy can identify how the researches in the area are characterized. Studies of review and mapping summarize which technologies are being used, how is the user’s experience, which skills are trained, which are the main limitations and future work of existing studies.

The literature review and mapping studies are essential because they reveal knowledge gaps, the state of the research in certain areas, the quality of the existing research, concepts, problems and issues that have not yet been solved. There are two types of reviews and systematic mapping studies: secondary and tertiary. The term “systematic” is used to refer to studies that use a well-defined methodology to identify, analyze, and interpret evidence related to research questions [27]. Tertiary mappings seek to categories secondary studies that deal with a same research question; it is a review of literature reviews that answers, in a descriptive way, broader research questions.

This work presents a systematic literature mapping, whose goal is to identify, analyze and categorize literature review studies on computational solutions for autism. Tertiary studies for this topic were not found yet. Our motivation to conduct this mapping is that there is an enormous amount of primary and also secondary studies involving autism and computer science. Consequently, doing initial researches be much more laborious and time-consuming to generate well-grounded and practical results.

This mapping contribution is to provide for researchers a synthesis of secondary studies’ characteristics as well as, which problems (from autism) and solutions (technologies) they approached. This synthesis includes the main sub-areas worked, both concerning autism, seeking which the individuals’ characteristics and comorbidities are focused in those studies, and concerning computation, searching for the most used and developed technologies. Furthermore, the mapping presents an overview of research gaps that need to be explored in the future.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II summarizes some concepts and needs associated with individuals with autism; Section III presents the protocol of the systematic mapping; Section IV discusses the results and gaps identified; and Section V presents our final considerations and future work.

