03 Systematic Mapping Protocol

This study was carried out following a systematic mapping protocol whose objective was to identify, analyze and classify review and mapping works related to the computer science literature on autism. The entire process of selection, classification and analysis of the studies was performed by two authors of this article, independently of each other, to avoid research bias. Face-to-face meetings were periodically carried out to integrate the results and resolve differences.

This mapping presents which technologies were researched and employed in autism, which areas and skills were focused, as well as which research questions, conclusions and future work were pointed out in the identified articles. Besides, the contribution of this mapping is to help new researchers in this area gain an overview of the current works and challenges for further research.

The Table 1 presents the research questions of this systematic mapping. To answer them two strategies were used: for RQ01 to RQ05, a subset of options for answers was predefined; and for RQ06 to RQ08, it was tried to infer themes from reading articles.



The RQs elaborated in this study were guided by the central goal of identifying studies involving computing for people with autism. In light of this objective, ample research questions were defined and after reviewed in pilot tests, taking into consideration that to compile this field we don’t want to limit the kind of problem (demand from autism) or solution (technology).

Two search strategies were used: (i) automatic search, using a search string in search bases; and (ii) snowball, selecting the references cited in the articles included in the automatic search.

The automatic search was performed in three of the main research bases in the Computer Science area: SCOPUS, ACM, and IEEE, in October 2018. To formulate the search string, some attempts were made to achieve a good return of significant articles, involving three subjects: terms associated with autism, technologies, and with literature review. Those attempts varied in two directions: changes in the string including words related to technologies such as assistive technology, robots, software, among others, and changes in the search fields - first, titles, abstracts and keywords were used.

The use of many terms together returned only a few articles, and there was no guarantee that all the possible technologies were included, so it was chosen to use a more open string without mentioning any specific technology. Besides that, the search considering the abstract field returned many false positives, since numerous articles mention in their abstract the word review, even when their focuses are not a review. After those attempts, it was observed that the meaningful articles had the words review and mapping in their titles or keywords. So, the string used in our search was:

(autism OR autistic) AND (review OR mapping OR survey)



That string was searched in titles and keywords considering the syntax rules of each of the three search databases previously mentioned. In Scopus, it was searched only into the Computer Science area.

After the searches, the titles and abstracts of the articles were read, and excluded those that did not present all of the inclusion criteria (IC) or had some exclusion criterion (EC), listed in Table 2. When there was doubt, the authors include it for its entire reading in the next phase. These same inclusion and exclusion criteria were also applied to the articles identified using snowball. Then, the selected articles were fully read to be classified. In this stage, some works were still excluded because they were primary studies or books.



To evaluate the quality of the studies included [29], it was checked whether the works met at least one of the quality criteria defined in Table 2. The studies that did not meet the minimum required were excluded from the mapping. The first two quality criteria were chosen because they are minimal characteristics to understand the study’s capacity of replication; the third criterion indicates the amplitude of the studies; and the fourth criterion indicates if the work provides to us a clear way to compare the studies that it reviewed.

