05 Final Remarks

This article presents a systematic mapping of secondary studies that analyze technological solutions for autism. The search for the articles was done through search engines in three scientific bases and through a backward snowball approach. After the application of quality and classification criteria, 33 studies were categorized by area and type of assistance, technology analyzed, stage of development of the target audience, and skills in focus. Furthermore, their methodological issues were also mapped to provide an overview of search strings, research questions, classification criteria, conclusions and challenges cited by the included studies.

The contribution of our work was to identify the state of research involving technology and autism is two directions: first, in a direct way and transverse to analyzed studies’ goals, how the review and mapping studies are characterized; and second, in an indirect way, how these studies describe the primary studies, i.e., a big picture of which are the more approached requirements and technologies for autism. Therefore, this article helps new researchers quickly visualize the area and make decisions on how to manage further secondary studies in this area. Besides, aiding also to know requirements that have not yet been satisfactorily met by primary studies, such as:

There is a need for technologies and studies that involve (or be focused on) older people (besides children) and take into consideration their needs.

There is a need for investigating: which are the effects of the use of technologies in the short, medium and long term considering aspects of different areas, and how to generalize their results.

There is a need for involving a multidisciplinary team that considers different perspectives within a technological application.

Technologies for people with autism should be adaptable and accessible since there is a diverse spectrum of needs. They also need to provide a proper fault tolerance mechanism to keep the patient engaged and not leave him frustrated, angry, anxious, etc.

These technologies need to provide a feedback mechanism for reporting technology usage data, also including biometric data for patient monitoring and technology assessment.

There is a need to develop studies better documented and publicly open so that other teams can continue, complement, or evaluate the technologies already developed.



Considering the results of the mapping study, it is proposed as future work the cataloging of what types of technology have been employed for which user characteristics, regarding disabilities, age, intervention methods, etc. There is a need to develop parameterization and adaptation mechanisms so that the technologies created can meet a greater variety of user characteristics, also considering the individuals’ preferences. Another potential point for future work is the validation of the impact of technology with an expressive audience of users to identify patterns where it is most efficient. Regarding review studies, it was not find neither studies focused on specific intervention methods such as Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA), Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped (Teacch), Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), sensory integration or nutritional aspects and assistive technologies; areas that are possibly worth researching.

